# Internationalization (i18n)

Provided via [i18next](https://www.i18next.com/) + [react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/), it's already configured to work without having to do anything (apart from configuring what languages are supported...)

On development mode, i18n locale .json files are also updated on real time thanks to [i18next-hmr](https://github.com/felixmosh/i18next-hmr).

On top of that, strong types are provided for a more robust code.

## Configuration

Locales are placed in [/resources/locales/[LANG]/](../resources/locales/).

As they follow `i18next` conventions, usually each locale will have its own folder and then translation can be divided on namespaces by placing them in different json files.

In the [i18n/constants.ts](../src/shared/i18n/constants.ts) file, edit the available constants to provide the desired configuration (default and every available language, initial namespaces to load, etc.)

## Usage

### Renderer + React

`i18next` uses `React.Suspense` by default. This means that unless the translations are pre-loaded explicitly, components using translations need to be wrapped in `<Suspense>` to avoid errors.

> _Note that translations are loaded via IPC from the same machine, meaning that even if the load is done asynchronously, it's super fast! But there's always the chance of components being rendered when the translations are not available, even if it's just for 1ms_

There are several ways to handle this easily:

#### Standard React

The standard way to do it with React would be:

```tsx
// my-component.tsx
import { FC, Suspense } from 'react';

export const MyComponent: FC<Props> = (props) => {
  return (
    <Suspense fallback="loading...">
      <Content {...props} />
    </Suspense>
  );
};

const Content: FC<Props> = (props) => {
  return (
    ...
  )
};
```

#### WithSuspense HoC

There's an _easier_ way to write the same without having to split the exported component using `Content` so it can be wrapped with `Suspense`:

```tsx
// my-component.tsx
import { FC } from 'react';
import { WithSuspense } from '@/shared/i18n';

export const MyComponent: FC<Props> = WithSuspense((props) => {
  return (
    ...
  )
}, 'loading...');
```

#### Preloading explicit namespaces

If for any reason the namespaces need to be explicitly preloaded and only display the content after the data load is finished, it can be done as well using `<PreloadI18nNs>`:

```tsx
// my-component.tsx
import { FC } from 'react';
import { PreloadI18nNs } from '@/shared/i18n';

export const MyComponent: FC<Props> = (props) => (
  <PreloadI18nNs ns="translations" fallback="loading...">
    ...
  </PreloadI18nNs>
);
```

or using the HoC version via `WithI18nNs`:

```tsx
// my-component.tsx
import { FC } from 'react';
import { WithI18nNs } from '@/shared/i18n';

export const MyComponent = WithI18nNs(
  {
    ns: 'translations',
    fallback: 'loading...'
  },
  (props) => {
    return (
      ...
    )
  }
);
```

### Typing the translations

This setup provides full typings for the i18n translations, usually not avilable otherwise.

Translations are semi-automatic, meaning that in the end, as there's no way (for now, as it could be automatized ー*TODO*ー) to detect which parameters each text uses, they need to be provided somehow with manual types.

i.e.,

```ts
// ns.json
{
  "foo": "Hello world!",
  "bar": "Hello {name}!"
}

// code.tsx
const { t } = useTranslation('ns');
const foo = t('foo');
const bar = t('bar', { name: 'world'});
```

When calling `useTranslation` there's no way to know the correct available namespaces, as this function only accepts `string` in this case.

The translation text provided by `bar` uses the data placeholder `{name}`, but since it's not typed, it could be easily forgotten, changed in a code refactor, or just mistaken because of a typo.

By providing the `I18nNamespaces` type in [@/shared/i18n/types.d.ts](../src/shared/i18n/types.d.ts)

Just associating the names of the available namespaces (names of the files) with their types, it's enough:

```ts
// only one language (the main language) for each namespace is enough
import ns from 'resources/locales/en/ns.json';

export type I18nNamespaces = {
  ns: typeof ns;
};
```

This is enough to provide types about the available namespaces and the available keys for each namespace.

If types about what placeholders are also wanted for each translation message, it can be done by providing `I18nMessageData`:

```ts
export type I18nMessageData = {
  ns: {
    // this means ns:bar has a placeholder {name}
    bar: ['name'];
    // note that keys without placeholders don't really need to be provided (like `foo`)
  };
};
```

If all of this sounds too tedious, it can also be disabled by setting these types to `never` in [@/shared/i18n/types.d.ts](../src/shared/i18n/types.d.ts) so everything behaves like the original functions provided by [i18next](https://www.i18next.com/)+[react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/):

```ts
export type I18nNamespaces = never;
export type I18nMessageData = never;
```
